chore: add VRL VM RFC (#10011)
vectordotdev/vector: rfcs/2021-11-12-9811-vrl-vm.md

# RFC 9811 - 2021-11-12 - VRL bytecode VM

This RFC proposes implementing a bytecode VM. VRL will be compiled to the bytecode

> and executed by this VM, with the aim to significantly improve the performance of

Reviewer: We should add a section to this RFC discussing (and proving) the performance gains we've seen from the early spike, as those gains are what warrants the effort needed to implement this RFC.

executing VRL scripts.

## Context

This RFC is a follow on from
[rfcs/2021-10-14-9811-vrl-performance.md](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/9812)

## Scope

### In scope

> This RFC is purely about developing a bytecode VM for VRL.

Reviewer: I'd like this RFC to be more explicit about the goals around making this as safe and easy to use. That includes:

1. Documentation/code comments
2. Testing (unit/fuzzing/...)
3. Preventing misuse through a safe API

### Out of scope

Any other performance issues relating to VRL will be discussed in
[rfcs/2021-10-14-9811-vrl-performance.md](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/9812)

## Proposal

### Implementation

Vrl compiles to an AST that is then walked during resolution. Each node in that
tree is boxed and stored in disparate regions of memory. As a result walking

> the tree means that the CPU caches must be constantly swapped.

Reviewer: This should be part of the "pains" section.

Instead we can create a bytecode VM to store the execution of the Vrl program.

Bytecode is essentially a big enum of instructions (that are represented by an integer
using the [num-derive](https://crates.io/crates/num-derive),
[num-traits](https://crates.io/crates/num-traits) crates):

```rust
#[derive(FromPrimitive, ToPrimitive, Copy, Clone, Debug, PartialEq, Eq)]
pub enum OpCode {
    Return = 255,
    Constant,
    Negate,
    Add,
    Subtract,
    Multiply,
    Divide,
    Print,
    Not,
    Greater,
    GreaterEqual,
    Less,
    LessEqual,
    NotEqual,
    Equal,
    Pop,
    JumpIfFalse,
    Jump,
    SetPath,
    GetPath,
    Call,
    ...
}
```

The Vm is a struct comprising of the following fields:

```rust
#[derive(Clone, Debug, Default)]

> pub struct Vm {

Reviewer: As discussed in our meeting, we'll need to update this to be able to keep track of errors.

    instructions: Vec<usize>,
    values: Vec<Literal>,

>     targets: Vec<Variable>,

Reviewer: Will these only be _internal_ targets, or also event (external) targets?

If the former, I think it should be sufficient to store `Vec<Ident>`, if the latter, we need to look at the existing `Target` type which covers all potential targets.

Author: We will need to represent both, but there's no reason why it couldn't be split up into:

```rust
internal_targets: Vec<Ident>,
external_targets: Vec<LookupBuf>,
```

    stack: Vec<Value>,

>     ip: usize,

Reviewer: I know this is just an example for this RFC, but I strongly recommend using full names instead of acronyms, since not many people might/will be familiar with the terminology used.

}
```

- instructions

The instructions field is a `Vec` of `OpCode` cast to a usize. The reason for
the cast is because not all instructions are `OpCode`. For example the
instructions `[.., Constant, 12, ..]` when evaluated will load the constant

> stored in the `values` `Vec` that is found in position 12 onto the stack.

Reviewer: In the vein of what we discussed during our get-together, I'd like to get as much safety as possible through Rust's type system, including introducing wrapper types to avoid misusing the VM API.

For example, for instructions, we could/should codify the invariants a bit more in the type system using something like:

```rust
enum Instruction {
	Opcode(Opcode),
	Literal(LiteralIndex),
}

pub struct LiteralIndex(usize);
```

There are more examples like that, we don't have to have consensus on all of them in this RFC, but we should have a section that explicitly mentions this as a requirement to successfully implementing the RFC, we can then iterate on the exact shape of those APIs in the implementation PRs.

Author: We could also keep the index in the OpCode itself like:

```
  enum OpCode {
   Constant(usize),
   Jump(usize),
   ...
 }
```

This gives us even more type safety and `size_of::<OpCode>` doesn't get any bigger. I've added this to the alternatives.

Reviewer: > We could also keep the index in the OpCode itself like:

I don't see how it gives _more_ type safety, given that the index for one opcode can point to a different store than the index for another opcode. With a wrapper type, you can ensure that the index for one store cannot be mixed with the index into another store.

Also, it might be worth looking into `repr(C)` and `NonZeroUsize` and the like, that allow the Rust compiler to add optimizations during compilation to reduce the word count of these wrapper types. I'm not that familiar with how this works, but for example `Option<NonZeroUsize>` is equal in size to `usize` because the compiler can use the first bit (the `0` value of the `usize`) to encode whether the value is a `Some` or `None`.

- values

A list of constant values found in the program. Since the bytecode only
contains integers any actual values must be stored here. This also allows
literals to be deduped.

- targets

A list of paths used in the program, similar to `values`.

- stack

The Vm is a stack based Vm. Every expression that is evaluated pushes the
result on the stack. Every operation pulls the values it uses from the stack.

- ip

The instruction pointer points to the next instruction to evaluate.

With each node of the AST compiled down to just a few bytes and all
instructions held in contiguous memory evaluation of the program should be able
to take full advantage of the CPU cache which should result in much faster

> execution.

Reviewer: This should be part of the "Rationale" chapter (it's probably worth taking another look at the [template](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/blob/master/rfcs/_YYYY-MM-DD-issue%23-title.md) as I've added a few other comments on rejigging a few paragraphs.

> #### Calling functions

Reviewer: I'd like this to be fleshed out more, so we can get a sense of what would be required for function implementors to use this new implementation. The goal would be to have minimal/no changes be needed, but whatever changes _are_ needed should be listed here, and we should describe how we envision making the API exposed to function authors a safe one.

Calling functions in the stdlib will be a case of evaluating each parameter
with the results pushed onto the stack.

Since Vrl allows for named parameters and optional parameters, the compiler
will need to ensure the bytecode evaluates each parameter in a specific order

> (likely the order declared in the function). Bytecode will need to be emmitted

Reviewer: This needs some clarification. Are you talking about the order declared in the _function implementation_, or the _function call_?

I haven't dug into this too deep yet, but it's important to note that the current implementation allows positional and named parameters to be mixed and matched, and ordering of named parameters is irrelevant.

That is, these are the same in VRL:

```coffee
encode_base64(value: .value, padding: true, charset: "...")
encode_base64(.value, true, "...")
encode_base64(charset: "...", padding: true, value: .value)
encode_base64(padding: true, .value, charset: "...")
# etc...
```

Reviewer 2: This would have to be as declared in the function implementation. The alternative would be to push named parameters onto the stack along with their name and let the callee put things in the right order. The alternative described here is _much_ more efficient.

Author: I like the idea of keeping the names with the values. 

I'm thinking it might be an idea to have a separate stack for parameters, this stack would be a `Vec<(&'static str, Value)>`. We have an OpCode for moving a value from the main stack to the parameter stack tagged with the name.

The function call will pull the values from this stack and pass the parameters to the function.

Reviewer 2: In the Python interpreter, at least, this method is a major performance cost since the called function then needs to decode the parameter ordering. Since we know the required parameters (because the stdlib is built in), we can fix the ordering and push/pop exactly what is needed to make it fastest.

Author: On second thoughts, I think adding the parameter name to the OpCode increases `size_of::<OpCode>()` to 24. We could include a similar lookup into a table, but I think given that we have all the information we need based on the position the parameters are declared in the function, we can work perfectly well just by position in the stack (with a placeholder for unspecified optional parameters).

for parameters that are not specified in the Vrl script to add a default value
to the stack.

### Optimization

With the code as a single dimension array of Bytecode, it could be possible to
scan the code for patterns and reorganise the Bytecode so it can run in a more
optimal way.

A lot more thought and research needs to go into this before we can consider

> implementing these changes.

Reviewer: We can move this to "future work"

## Drawbacks

Downsides to using a Vm:

- The code is a bit more complex. With an AST that is walked it is fairly apparent
  what the code will be doing at any point. With a Vm, this is not the case, it
  is harder to look at the instructions in the Vm and follow back to what part
  of the Vrl code is being evaluated. We will need to write some extensive

>   debugging tools to allow for decent introspection into the Vm.

Reviewer: There's no mention of these debugging tools anywhere else in the RFC. It's probably worth elaborating on what you have in mind for this.

  However, VRL is a very simple language, which does also mean the VM will be

>   simple.

Reviewer: VRL is also still evolving. We're adding iteration soon, and there's no way to know what else we might introduce in the future, so this is somewhat of a moot point, I think.

Author: I imagine that even with more features added, the goal of the language will still be to keep things simple.

However, it is true that iteration and in particular lexical scoping will increase the complexity. This will also change the planned approach to iteration, so needs some thought.

Reviewer 2: It's not obvious that these complexities in the _language_ necessarily increase the complexity of the _VM_, just like the complexities in Rust don't necessarily require a more complex CPU instruction set. There will be some new requirements, but I would expect them to be relatively small.

- We lose some safety that we get from the Rust compiler. There will need
  to be significant fuzz testing to ensure that the code runs correctly under
  all circumstances. It should be noted however that the entire VM will not
  require any _unsafe_ code.

- Currently each stdlib function is responsible for evaluating their own
  parameters. This allows parameters to be lazily evaluated. Most likely with a
  Vm, the parameters will need to be evaluated up front and the stack passed
  into the function. This could impact performance.

## Prior Art

- Goscript - An implementation of Go using a bytecode Vm,
  https://github.com/oxfeeefeee/goscript

- CPython - https://github.com/python/cpython

## Plan Of Attack

- [ ] Submit a PR with spike-level code _roughly_ demonstrating the change for

>       the VM.

Reviewer: This needs to be fleshed out more.

Specifically, I'd like to see the approach we discussed listed here:

1. Introduce/implement the VM itself, without updating any of the expressions. This includes tests (unit/property), documentation/code comments, and an as-safe-as-possible API surrounding the VM operations. 
2. Update one or two expressions to set the tone for future work of updating all the other expressions and functions (if needed)
3. Divvy up the work to update all other expressions(/functions).

Author: I think if we create a decent wrapper for Functions number 2 in this list could potentially be a simple `sed` call.

    Not,
    Greater,
    GreaterEqual,
    Less,
    LessEqual,
    NotEqual,
    Equal,
    Pop,
    JumpIfFalse,
    Jump,
    SetPath,
    GetPath,
    Call,
    ...
}

enum Instruction {
    Opcode(Opcode),
    Literal(LiteralIndex),
}

pub struct LiteralIndex(usize);
```

The Vm is a struct comprising of the following fields:

```rust
#[derive(Clone, Debug, Default)]
pub struct Vm {
    instructions: Vec<Instruction>,
    constants: Vec<Literal>,
    targets: Vec<Variable>,
    stack: Vec<Value>,
    parameter_stack: Vec<Option<Value>>,
    error: Option<Error>,
    instruction_pointer: usize,
}
```

- instructions

The instructions field is a `Vec` of `Instruction`. An instruction can be
either an OpCode or some data for that OpCode. For example, the instructions
`[.., OpCode(Constant), Literal(12), ..]` when evaluated will load the constant
stored in the `values` `Vec` that is found in position 12 onto the stack.

- constants

A list of constant values found in the program. Since the bytecode only
contains integers any actual values must be stored here. This also allows
literals to be deduped.

- targets

A list of paths used in the program, similar to `values`.

- stack

> The Vm is a stack based Vm. Every expression that is evaluated pushes the
> result on the stack. Every operation pulls the values it uses from the stack.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Vm is a stack based Vm. Every expression that is evaluated pushes the
result on to the stack. Every operation pops the values it uses from the stack.
```

  all circumstances. It should be noted however that the entire VM will not
  require any _unsafe_ code.

- Currently each stdlib function is responsible for evaluating their own
  parameters. This allows parameters to be lazily evaluated. Most likely with ajj
  Vm, the parameters will need to be evaluated up front and the stack passed
  into the function. This could impact performance.

## Prior Art

- GoScript - An implementation of Go using a bytecode Vm,
  https://github.com/oxfeeefeee/goscript

- CPython - https://github.com/python/cpython

## Alternatives

### WASM

Instead of writing our own VM we could transpile VRL code to WASM. WASM is a
mature and performant VM that could give us near native speeds.

The issues with using WASM are that it would require data to be serialized in
order to move between Vector and WASM. This would incur a significant
performance penalty.

WASM provides a lot more functionality and complexity than is required for VRL.
By developing our own VM we will be able to customize it purely for the usecase
required by VRL. This allows us to implement very VRL specific OpCodes which

> should allow the bytecode stay simple.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
should allow the bytecode to stay simple.
```

> # RFC 9811 - 2021-11-12 - VRL enum VM (VenuM)

Author: True, especially since there is still some questions around whether we want to go enum of bytecode.

This RFC proposes implementing a enum VM. VRL will be compiled to a list of
instructions and executed by this VM, with the aim to significantly improve the
performance of executing VRL programs.

## Context

This RFC is a follow on from
[rfcs/2021-10-14-9811-vrl-performance.md](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/9812)

## Scope

### In scope

This RFC is purely about developing a enum VM for VRL. It will discuss the
risks involved in running VRL with a VM and the measures we will take to
mitigate those risks.

> ### Out of scope

Reviewer: It came to mind that I think it would be good to add "user-facing breaking changes" as out of scope for this RFC. That is, whatever implementation we end up with, there shouldn't be any difference to the user, other than a faster runtime.

If we do want to do optimizations that require a breaking change, I suggest pulling those out into a separate issue, and discuss them separately, so that we don't block any work listed in this RFC.

Author: Yes! It is very much the plan as a part of the testing to be able to run the current implementation alongside the VM to make sure the output doesn't change in any way.

Reviewer 4: Yes, to add to this, there should be _no_ user facing changes other than VRL is faster. I've talked with Stephen offline a bit about this but I'd like to see us have property tests that assert the equivalent operation of the tree walker and the enum VM. That'll allow us to be sure any future optimization passes don't introduce gross regressions.

Any other performance issues relating to VRL will be discussed in
[rfcs/2021-10-14-9811-vrl-performance.md](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/9812)

## Pain

Vrl compiles to an AST that is then walked during resolution. Each node in that
tree is boxed and stored in disparate regions of memory. As a result walking
the tree means that the CPU caches must be constantly swapped.

## Proposal

### Implementation

Instead we can create an enum VM to store the execution of the Vrl program.

The enum is essentially a big enum of instructions:

```rust
#[derive(Copy, Clone, Debug, PartialEq, Eq)]
pub enum OpCode {
    Return,
    Constant,
    Negate,
    Add,
    Subtract,
    Multiply,
    Divide,
    Print,
    Not,
    Greater,
    GreaterEqual,
    Less,
    LessEqual,
    NotEqual,
    Equal,
    Pop,
    JumpIfFalse,
    Jump,
    SetPath,
    GetPath,
    Call,
    ...
}

enum Instruction {
    Opcode(Opcode),
    Literal(LiteralIndex),

> }

Reviewer 2: I know we've discussed reworking this to put the literals into the opcode enum, but I just realized another disadvantage of this format: each opcode that takes a literal takes a minimum of four words this way, making it dramatically less efficient for storage for no real gain. We would be better to use the other approach (literals into the opcode enum) with two words per opcode, or an untyped literal byte code, but I suspect the former would be simpler to implement.

> pub struct LiteralIndex(usize);

Author: I imagine for the vast majority of programs `u8` would be sufficient, the remaining would never exceed `u16`. 

This is the appeal of the dynamically sized  bytecode VM. We could stick with `u8` for most programs and only stretch out over two bytes in the rare situations it's necessary..

> pub struct LiteralIndex(usize);

Author: I'll update this to `u16` for now..

> pub struct LiteralIndex(usize);

Reviewer 4: It's worth measuring if dynamic sizing has an effect on runtime speed versus complexity, but I'd say initial goal should be to crank a VM out with the simplest possible implementation, whether that's fixed sized representations or dynamic. That said, I would tend to avoid `usize` since it's a type that changes size depending on machine architecture.

```

> The Vm is a struct comprising of the following fields:

Reviewer 2: Nit: it should be "VM" everywhere in English, as it is an acronym. Only clippy wants it to be `Vm`.

    stack: Vec<Value>,
    parameter_stack: Vec<Option<Value>>,
    error: Option<Error>,
    instruction_pointer: usize,
}
```

- instructions

The instructions field is a `Vec` of `Instruction`. An instruction can be
either an OpCode or some data for that OpCode. For example, the instructions
`[.., OpCode(Constant), Literal(12), ..]` when evaluated will load the constant
stored in the `values` `Vec` that is found in position 12 onto the stack.

- constants

A list of constant values found in the program. Since the bytecode only
contains integers any actual values must be stored here. This also allows
literals to be deduped.

- targets

A list of paths used in the program, similar to `values`.

- stack

The Vm is a stack based Vm. Every expression that is evaluated pushes the
result on the stack. Every operation pulls the values it uses from the stack.

- parameter_stack

For function calls, the parameters need to be evaluated and passed to the
function. The stack is a `Vec` of parameter name and value. We need an OpCode
that will copy a value from the main stack to the parameter stack tagged with
the parameter name. The `FunctionArgs` compiler will dump this OpCode after the

> code to evaluate the given arg is dumped.

Reviewer 2: Is there value in having this separate from the primary stack? I don't see an opcode that can push onto this stack separately.

- error

If an operation errors, it needs to populate this field. Operations such as
the error assignment (`result, error = thing()`) will need to check if this

> field has been populated and action accordingly.

Reviewer 2: If we have a value stack, should this value not also go on the stack, or is the error value really special? What opcode handles its value?

Author: The error value is a special value in that it is an Error and needs to be identified as such. 

We could make the stack a `Vec<Result<Value, Error>>`, but I think that would be more of a pain than just storing the errors elsewhere - similar to how `C` uses `errno`.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that's going to be a big pain. I was thinking more that functions that emit the pair of results would push both on the stack, and callers that don't use one or the other simply pop the relevant entry into oblivion. This is likely simpler to implement for the spike, though.

- instruction_pointer

The instruction pointer points to the next instruction to evaluate.

#### Calling functions

Calling functions in the stdlib will be a case of evaluating each parameter
with the results pushed onto the parameter stack.

Since VRL allows for named parameters, parameters need to be pushed on to the
parameter stack _in the order that they are specified in the `Function`

> implementation_.

Reviewer: Is this correct? Or, is this the complete story?

I'm still unsure how this solves the problem of VRL programs allowing function calls to mix-and-match named and positional arguments _and_ allowing named arguments to be anywhere in the function call, i.e. there is no pre-defined order for named parameters.

Reviewer 2: The compiler would need to re-order the parameters at the call site to match the function definition. IOW if we have a function defined as `foo(a, b, c)` and the program calls `foo(1, c=2, b=3)`, the compiler would need to reorder it to `foo(1, 3, 2)`, and the called function can then pull the values off the stack in a predictable order.

Reviewer: Got it, that makes perfect sense 👍

Parameters are optional and may not be specified. However, to avoid passing
parameters to the wrong function, an OpCode still needs to be emitted to move

> a placeholder value - `None` - to the parameter stack.

Reviewer 2: Given this, you might find value in having a specific opcode to push a `None` onto the stack.

Take the following hypothetical situation:

```coffeescript
thing(surname: "nong", name: thang(name: "nork"))
```

Supposing function `thang` also took an optional parameter `surname`, when
`thang` is called, we will have a `surname` parameter on the parameter stack.
Without the placeholder, `thang` would thing that `surname` was being passed to
it. If the placeholder is pushed, it would consume this instead.

We do not want `stdlib` functions to have access to the VM since that risks a
rogue function destroying the VM's state.

Current `stdlib` functions are composed of a combination of `compile` and
`resolve` functions. These function will need to be combined into a single

> function `call`.

Reviewer 5: One thing to be careful of here is that we don't lose the ability to do work at compile time that can be reused across calls (e.g. pre-compiling regex). In general it'd be nice for functions to be defined directly in terms of the types they operate on, and have the validation and preparation of those values be a separate step that we're able to omit when we have sufficient information to know they're not needed.

The `ArgumentList` parameter that is passed into `call` will have access to the
parameter stack and the parameter list exposed by the `Function`. This can use
these to return the appropriate values for the `required`, `optional` etc..

> functions.

Reviewer: I'd love to see a stripped-down example of one of the existing function implementations (f.e. `upcase`), to get a better sense of how this would work, and if this pattern fits all existing use-cases.

Since the `compile` function was also used by some `stdlib` functions to
validate the parameters we may alse need a function `validate_parameters` that
these functions can use to perform extra validation on the parameters.

### Debugging

We need debugging tools to help us introspect and debug the compiled bytecode.

#### Dissassembler

Output the compiled code in readable format to the console.

#### Step debugger

Output each step of the VM to the console, print the Stack and other state
variables in the VM. Allow the user to press a key to move to the next step.

#### Linter

Check each instruction to ensure:

> - each Jump Opcode jumps to a valid location in the bytecode.

Reviewer 2: Currently, given that there are no loops, also check that each jump is a forward jump. I understand that may be short lived, though.

Author: Theoretically we could create different OpCodes for forward and backward jumps which would still allow for this check.

Reviewer 4: I would even go so far as to say VRL design should be kept so that we can maintain this check.

Given that implementing the VM involves adding methods to the Expression trait,
it should be possible to run the existing AST alongside the VM. We can then
ensure that we get exactly the same results from each approach.

## Rationale

With each node of the AST compiled down to just a few bytes and all
instructions held in contiguous memory evaluation of the program should be able
to take full advantage of the CPU cache which should result in much faster
execution.

## Drawbacks

Downsides to using a Vm:

- The code is a bit more complex. With an AST that is walked it is fairly
  apparent what the code will be doing at any point. With a Vm, this is not the
  case, it is harder to look at the instructions in the Vm and follow back to
  what part of the VRL code is being evaluated. We will need to write some
  extensive debugging tools to allow for decent introspection into the Vm.

  However, VRL is a very simple language, which does also mean the VM will be
  simple.

- We lose some safety that we get from the Rust compiler. There will need
  to be significant fuzz testing to ensure that the code runs correctly under

>   all circumstances.

Reviewer 4: Core team will help you get the CI infra in place for this, spec out the fuzz tests.

  It should be noted however that the entire VM will not require any _unsafe_
  Rust code.

- Currently each stdlib function is responsible for evaluating their own
  parameters. This allows parameters to be lazily evaluated. With the Vm, the
  parameters will need to be evaluated up front and the stack passed into the

>   function. This could impact performance.

Reviewer: This could potentially be a big downside, given that almost all VRL programs are function-call-heavy.

I'd love to see this fleshed out a bit more, with some real-world examples of functions that would most likely be impacted by this, and how that impact changes their behaviour.

## Prior Art

- GoScript - An implementation of Go using a bytecode Vm,
  https://github.com/oxfeeefeee/goscript

- CPython - https://github.com/python/cpython

## Alternatives

### WASM

Instead of writing our own VM we could transpile VRL code to WASM. WASM is a
mature and performant VM that could give us near native speeds.

The issues with using WASM are that it would require data to be serialized in
order to move between Vector and WASM. This would incur a significant

> performance penalty.

Reviewer: I mentioned this in our meeting, but this isn't actually accurate. Wasm allows [both the host and the Wasm module to mutably access the same chunk of memory](https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/exec/runtime.html#memory-instances).

See, for example, the [`wasmer`](https://docs.rs/wasmer/2.0.0/wasmer/struct.Memory.html) crate.

It's true, though, that we'll need wrappers to represent our types, but there's also a lot of ongoing work with [Wasm interface types](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2019/08/webassembly-interface-types/) to make this simpler.

Still, I agree with the conclusion that this is a step too far for a first iteration, but I want to avoid that conclusion being based on the wrong assumptions.

required by VRL. This allows us to implement very VRL specific OpCodes which
should allow the bytecode stay simple.

### Represent additional data in the OpCode

The current suggestion represents each OpCode as a single instruction in the
instruction list. An OpCode with it's data occupies two instructions.

For example, with the current suggestion to load a constant three things have
to happen:

1. Add the Constant OpCode to the instructions.
2. Add the actual constant value to the list of constants.
3. Add the index of the constant in the constant list to the list of constants.

#### Include value in the OpCode

These three things could be represented as a single instruction if we included
the constant value in the OpCode:

```rust
enum OpCode {
    ...
    Constant(Box<Value>)
    ...
}
```

This will increase `size_of::<OpCode>` from 8 to 16, potentially doubling the
memory size of the instruction list.

It also means we do not need to store a separate list of constants. On the plus
side, this is one less lookup at runtime to load the constant. On the down side,
we wouldn't be able to dedupe the constant, so for example, if the code uses the

> same string twice, it would be represented twice in the bytecode.

Reviewer 2: Worse, since the values are boxed, you have now introduced a non-linear indirection to get at the value, which is exactly the kind of memory accesses this RFC is trying to avoid.

> #### Bitmask the OpCode data

Reviewer: This is an interesting proposal, and worth exploring in the future, but my initial preference would be to leverage Rust's types and type-safety as much as possible. The suggestion here isn't necessarily "unsafe", but it adds another point where we can mess up (and requires a closed-down API to avoid others from doing the same).

I would probably suggest moving this (and "Include value in the OpCode") out of the "alternatives" section, and into "future work", as I don't think it's _either this or the other_, but rather we can start safer but potentially a bit slower, and then move towards more "unsafe" solutions that give us an extra few percentages of performance gains.
